
# Bolingbroke

From the Quicksilver Metaweb.

[The System of the World](/the-system-of-the-world) page for **Bolingbroke**
### Stephensonia


***Chester** led here. Many events [Daniel](/daniel-waterhouse) would have been aware of below.*

### Authored entries


* TBA


### [Wikipedia: Bolingbroke](/)


**Bolingbroke**, now called **Old Bolingbroke**, is a market town near Boston in Lincolnshire, England.

It is the site of a historic castle, once owned by John of Gaunt. King Henry IV of England, who was born at Bolingbroke Castle, is often referred to simply as "Bolingbroke". **Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke** is also sometimes referred to simply by his title.

### [Wikipedia: Bolingbroke Castle](/)


**Bolingbroke Castle**, at Bolingbroke (or Old Bolingbroke) in Lincolnshire was founded by Ranulf, Earl of [Chester](/), during the early 13th century, and in 1311 passed to the House of Lancaster; its most famous owner was John of Gaunt. It was destroyed during the [English Civil War](/english-civil-war), but has been partly restored.

Most of the castle is built of Spilsby greenstone, as is the nearby church. It was originally surrounded by a moat. Important events which took place at Bolingbroke Castle:
* Birth of King Henry IV of England (1367)
* Death of Blanche of Lancaster, wife of John of Gaunt (1369)


### [Wikipedia: Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke](/)


**Henry St John, 1st Viscount Bolingbroke** ([1678](/) - [December 12](/), [1751](/)) was an [English](/) statesman and writer. 

(Note that in Britain the surname "St John" is pronounced *Sinj'n* and "Bolingbroke" is pronounced *Bullingbrook* or *Bullenbrook*.)

He was the son of Sir [Henry St John, Bart.](/) (afterwards 1st Viscount St John), and of Lady Mary Rich, daughter of the 2nd Earl of Warwick. His exact date of birth is unknown, but he was baptized on [October 10](/), 1678, and was educated at [Eton](/).

He travelled abroad during [1698](/) and [1699](/) and acquired an exceptional knowledge of French, but also led an exceptionally dissipated and extravagant youth. [Oliver Goldsmith](/) reported that he had been seen to "run naked through the park in a state of intoxication." [Swift](/jonathan-swift), his intimate friend, said that he wanted to be thought the [Alcibiades](/) or [Petronius](/) of his age, and to mix licentious orgies with the highest political responsibilities. In [1700](/) he married Frances, daughter of Sir Henry Winchcombe, Bart., of Bucklebury, [Berkshire](/), but this made little difference to his lifestyle.

He was returned to parliament in [1701](/) for the family borough of [Wootton Bassett](/) in [Wiltshire](/), as a [Tory](/). He attached himself to [Robert Harley](/) (afterwards Lord Oxford), then speaker, and distinguished himself by his eloquence in debate, eclipsing his schoolfellow, [Robert Walpole](/), and gaining an extraordinary ascendancy over the [House of Commons](/). In May he had charge of the bill for securing the Protestant succession; he took part in the impeachment of the [Whig](/) lords for their conduct concerning the Partition treaties, and opposed the oath of loyalty against the "[Old Pretender](/)". In March [1702](/) he was chosen commissioner for taking the public accounts.

After [Anne](/queen-anne)'s accession, St John supported the bills in 1702 and 1704 against occasional conformity, and took a leading part in the disputes which arose between the two Houses. In [1704](/) St John took office with Harley as secretary at war, thus being brought into intimate relations with [John Churchill, 1st Duke of Marlborough](/john-churchill-duke-of-marlborough), by whom he was treated with favour. In 1708 he left office with Harley on the failure of the latter's intrigue, and retired to the country till [1710](/), when he became a [privy councillor](/) and secretary of state in Harley's new ministry, representing [Berkshire](/) in parliament. He supported the bill for requiring a real property qualification for a seat in parliament. In [1711](/) he founded the Brothers' Club, a society of Tory politicians and men of letters, and the same year witnessed the failure of the two expeditions to the [West Indies](/) and to [Canada](/) promoted by him. In [1712](/) he was the author of the bill taxing newspapers.

The refusal of the Whigs to make peace with [France](/) in [1706](/), and again in [1709](/) when [Louis XIV](/louis-xiv) offered to yield every point for which the allies professed to be fighting, showed that the war was not being continued in the national interest, and the ministry was supported by the queen, parliament and the people in wishing to terminate hostilities. Because of the diversity of aims among the allies, St John was induced to enter into separate and secret negotiations with France for the security of English interests. In May 1712 he ordered the [Duke of Ormonde](/), who had succeeded Marlborough in command, to refrain from any further engagement. These instructions were communicated to the French, though not to the allies, Louis putting [Dunkirk](/) as security into possession of England, and the English troops deserted their allies almost on the battlefield. Subsequently St John received the congratulations of the French minister, Torcy, on the French victory over Prince Eugene at Denain.

In August St John, who had on [July 7](/) been created Viscount Bolingbroke and Baron St John of Lydiard Tregoze, went to France to conduct negotiations, and signed an armistice between England and France for four months on the [19th](/). Finally the [Treaty of Utrecht](/treaty-of-utrecht) was signed on [March 31](/) [1713](/) by all the allies except the emperor. The first production of Addison's Cato was made by the Whigs the occasion of a great demonstration of indignation against the peace, and by Bolingbroke for presenting the actor Booth with a purse of fifty guineas for "defending the cause of liberty against a perpetual dictator" (Marlborough). In the terms granted to England there was perhaps little to criticize. But the manner of the peacemaking, which had been carried on by a series of underhand conspiracies with the enemy instead of by open conferences with the allies, and was characterized throughout by a violation of the most solemn international assurances, left a deep and lasting stain upon the national honour and credit; and not less dishonourable was the abandonment of the [Catalans](/) by the treaty.

In June Bolingbroke's commercial treaty with France, establishing free trade with that country, was rejected. Meanwhile the friendship between Bolingbroke and Harley, the basis of the whole Tory administration, had been gradually dissolved. In March [1711](/), by Guiscard's attempt on his life, Harley got the wound which had been intended for St John, with all the credit. In May Harley obtained the earldom of Oxford and was made lord treasurer, while in July St John was greatly disappointed at receiving only his viscountcy instead of the earldom lately extinct in his family, and at being passed over for the [Order of the Garter](/). In September [1713](/) Swift came to London, and made a final vain attempt to reconcile his two friends. But now a further cause of difference had arisen. The queen's health was visibly breaking, and the Tory ministers anticipated their downfall on the accession of the Elector of Hanover.

Both Oxford and Bolingbroke had maintained for some time secret communications with James, and promised their help in restoring him at the queen's death. The aims of the former, prudent, procrastinating and vacillating by nature, never extended probably beyond the propitiation of his Tory followers; and it is difficult to imagine that Bolingbroke could have really advocated the Pretender's recall, whose divine right he repudiated and whose religion and principles he despised. Nevertheless, whatever his chief motive may have been, whether to displace Oxford as leader of the party, to strengthen his position and that of the faction in order to dictate terms to the future king, or to reinstate James, Bolingbroke, yielding to his more impetuous and adventurous disposition, went much further than Oxford. It is possible to suppose a connection between his zeal for making peace with France and a desire to forward the Pretender's interests or win support from the Jacobites. During his diplomatic mission to France he had incurred blame for remaining at the opera while the Pretender was present, and according to the [Mackintosh](/) transcripts he had several secret interviews with him. Regular communications were kept up subsequently.

In March 1714 Herville, the French envoy in London, sent to Torcy, the French foreign minister in [Paris](/), the substance of two long conversations with Bolingbroke in which the latter advised patience till after the accession of George, when a great reaction was to be expected in favour of the Pretender. At the same time he spoke of the treachery of Marlborough and Berwick, and of one Other, presumably Oxford, whom he refused to name, all of whom were in communication with Hanover. Both Oxford and Bolingbroke warned James that he could have little chance of success unless he changed his religion, but the latter's refusal ([March 13](/)) does not appear to have stopped the communications. Bolingbroke gradually superseded Oxford in the leadership. Lady Masham, the queen's favourite, quarrelled with Oxford and identified herself with Bolingbroke's interests. The harsh treatment of the Hanoverian demands was inspired by him, and won favour with the queen, while Oxford's influence declined; and by his support of the Schism Bill in May 1714, a violent Tory measure forbidding all education by dissenters by making an episcopal licence obligatory for schoolmasters, he probably intended to compel Oxford to give up the game. Finally, a charge of corruption brought by Oxford in July against Bolingbroke and [Abigail Masham](/), in connexion with the commercial treaty with [Spain](/), failed, and the lord treasurer was dismissed or retired on [July 27](/).

Bolingbroke was now supreme, and everything appeared tending inevitably to a Jacobite restoration. The Jacobite Sir [William Windham](/) had been made chancellor of the exchequer, important military posts were placed in the hands of the faction, and a new ministry of Jacobites was projected. But now the queen's sudden death on [August 1](/), and the appointment of Shrewsbury to the lord treasurership, instantly changed the whole scene and ruined Bolingbroke. "The earl, of Oxford was removed on Tuesday," he wrote to Swift on [August 3](/), "the queen died on Sunday! What a world is this and how does fortune banter us!" According to Herville, the French envoy, Bolingbroke declared to him that in six weeks he could have secured everything. Nevertheless the exact nature of his projects remains obscure. It is probable that his statement in his letter to Windham that "none of us had any very settled resolution" is true, though his declaration in the Patriot King that "there were no designs on foot ... to place, the crown on the head of the Pretender" is a palpable falsehood. His great object was doubtless to gain supreme power and to keep it by any means, and by any betrayal that the circumstances demanded; and it is not without significance perhaps that on the very day of Oxford's dismissal he gave a dinner to the Whig leaders, and on the day preceding the queen's death ordered overtures to be made to the elector.

On the accession of [George I](/george-i-of-england) the illuminations and bonfire at Lord Bolingbroke's house in Golden Square were "particularly fine and remarkable," but he was immediately dismissed from office. He retired to Bucklebury and is said to have now written the answer to the *Secret History of the White Staff* accusing him of Jacobitism. In March 1715 he in vain attempted to defend the late ministry in the new parliament; and on the announcement of [Walpole](/)'s intended attack upon the authors of the treaty of Utrecht he fled in disguise ([March 28](/), [1715](/)) to Paris, where he was well received, after having addressed a letter to Lord Lansdowne from Dover protesting his innocence and challenging "the most inveterate of his enemies to produce any instance of his criminal correspondence."

Bolingbroke in July entirely identified himself with the interests of the Pretender, whose secretary he became, and on [September 10](/) he was attainted. But his counsel was neglected for that of ignorant refugees and Irish priests. The expedition of 1715 was resolved upon against his advice. He drew up James's declaration, but the assurances he had inserted concerning the security of the Church of England were cancelled by the priests. He remained at Paris, and endeavoured to establish relations with the regent. On the return of James, as the result of petty intrigues and jealousies, Bolingbroke was dismissed from his office. He now renounced all further efforts on the Pretender's behalf. Replying to Mary of Modena, who had sent a message deprecating his ill-will, he wished his arm might rot off if he ever used pen or sword in their service again!

He now turned to the British government in hopes of pardon. In March 1716 he declared his final abandonment of the Pretender and promised to use his influence to secure the withdrawal of his friends; but he refused to betray any secrets or any individuals. He wrote his *Reflexions upon Exile*, and in 1717 his letter to Sir W Windham in explanation of his position, generally considered one of his finest compositions, but not published till 1753 after his death. The same year he formed a liaison with Marie Claire Deschamps de Marcilly, widow of the marquis de Villette, whom he married in 1720 after the death in 1718 of Lady Bolingbroke, whom he had treated with cruel neglect. He bought and resided at the estate of La Source near [Orléans](/), studied [philosophy](/), criticized the chronology of the Bible, and was visited amongst others by [Voltaire](/voltaire), who expressed unbounded admiration for his learning and politeness. In 1723, through the medium of the king's mistress, the duchess of Kendal, he at last received his pardon, returned to London in June or July, and placed his services at the disposal of Walpole, by whom, however, his offers to procure the accession of several Tories to the administration were received very coldly.

During the following winter he made himself useful in France in gaining information for the government. In 1725 an act was passed enabling him to hold real estate but without power of alienating it. But this had been effected in consequence of a peremptory order of the king, against Walpole's wishes, who succeeded in maintaining his exclusion from the House of Lords. He now bought an estate at Dawley, near Uxbridge, where he renewed his intimacy with [Pope](/), Swift and Voltaire, took part in Pope's literary squabbles, and wrote the philosophy for the Essay on Man. On the first occasion which offered itself, that of Pulteney's rupture with Walpole in 1726, he endeavoured to organize an opposition in conjunction with the former and Windham; and in 1727 began his celebrated series of letters to the Craftsman, attacking the Walpoles, signed an "Occasional Writer." He gained over the Duchess of Kendal with a bribe of £11,000 from his wife's estates, and with Walpole's approval obtained an audience with George. His success was imminent, and it was thought his appointment as chief minister was assured. In Walpole's own words, "as St John had the duchess entirely on his side I need not add what must or might in time have been the consequence," and he prepared for his dismissal. But once more Bolingbroke's "fortune turned rotten at the very moment it grew ripe," and his projects and hopes were ruined by the king's death in June. Further papers from his pen signed "John Trot" appeared in the *Craftsman* in 1728, and in 1730 followed *Remarks on the History of England* by [Humphrey Oldcastle](/), attacking the Walpoles' policy. Comment prompted by Bolingbroke was continued in the House of Commons by Windham, and great efforts were made to establish the alliance between the Tories and the Opposition Whigs. The Excise Bill in 1733 and the Septennial Bill in the following year offered opportunities for further attacks on the government, which Bolingbroke supported by a new series of papers in the *Craftsman* styled "A Dissertation on Parties"; but the whole movement collapsed after the new elections, which returned Walpole to power in 1735 with a large majority.

Bolingbroke retired baffled and disappointed from the fray to France in June, residing principally at the château of Argeville near [Fontainebleau](/). He now wrote his *Letters on the Study of History* (printed privately before his death and published in 1752), and the *True Use of Retirement*. In 1738 he visited England, became one of the leading friends and advisers of Frederick, prince of Wales, who now headed the opposition, and wrote for the occasion *The Patriot King*, which together with a previous essay, *The Spirit of Patriotism*, and *The State of Parties at the Accession of George I*, were entrusted to [Pope](/) and not published. Having failed, however, to obtain any share in politics, he returned to France in 1739, and subsequently sold Dawley. In 1742 and 1743 he again visited England and quarrelled with Warburton. In 1744 he settled finally at [Battersea](/) with his friend Hugh Hume, 3rd earl of Marchmont, and was present at Pope's death in May. The discovery that the poet had printed secretly 1500 copies of *The Patriot King*, caused him to publish a correct version in 1749, and stirred up a further altercation with Warburton, who defended his friend against Bolingbroke's bitter aspersions, the latter, whose conduct was generally reprehended, publishing a *Familiar Epistle to the most Impudent Man Living*. In 1744 he had been very busy assisting in the negotiations for the establishment of the new "broad bottom" administration, and showed no sympathy for the Jacobite expedition in 1745. lie recommended the tutor for Prince George, afterwards [George III](/). About 1749 he wrote the *Present State of the Nation*, an unfinished pamphlet. Lord Chesterfield records the last words heard from him: "God who placed me here will do what He pleases with me hereafter and He knows best what to do." He died on the 12th of December 1751, his wife having predeceased him in 1750. They were both buried in the parish church at Battersea, where a monument with medallions and inscriptions composed by Bolingbroke was erected to their memory.

The writings and career of Bolingbroke make a far weaker impression upon posterity than they made on contemporaries. His genius and character were superficial; his abilities were exercised upon ephemeral objects, and not inspired by lasting or universal ideas. [Bute](/) and George III indeed derived their political ideas from *The Patriot King*, but the influence which he is said to have exercised upon Voltaire, Gibbon and Burke is very problematical. [Edmund Burke](/) wrote his *Vindication of Natural Society* in imitation of Bolingbroke's style, but in refutation of his principles; and in the Reflections on the French Revolution he exclaims, "Who now reads Bolingbroke, who ever read him through?" Burke denies that Bolingbroke's words left "any permanent impression on his mind." Bolingbroke's conversation, described by Lord Chesterfield as "such a flowing happiness of expression that even his most familiar conversations if taken down in writing would have borne the press without the least correction," his delightful companionship, his wit, good looks, and social qualities which charmed during his lifetime and made firm friendships with men of the most opposite character, can now only be faintly imagined. His most brilliant gift was his eloquence, which according to Swift was acknowledged by men of all factions to be unrivalled.

None of his great speeches has survived, a loss regretted by [Pitt](/) more than that of the missing books of [Livy](/) and [Tacitus](/). His political works, often splendidly eloquent, spirited and dignified, are for the most part exceedingly rhetorical, while his philosophical essays were undertaken with the chief object of displaying his eloquence, and no characteristic renders writings less readable for posterity. They are both deficient in solidity and in permanent interest. The first deals with mere party questions without sincerity and without depth; and the second, composed as an amusement in retirement without any serious preparation, in their attacks on [metaphysics](/) and theology and in their feeble [deism](/) present no originality and carry no conviction. 

He was succeeded in the title as 2nd Viscount Bolingbroke, according to the special remainder, by his nephew Frederick, 3rd Viscount St John (a title granted to Bolingbroke's father in 1716), from whom the title has descended.

#### Positiions


* As [Secretary at War](/) 1704–1708 preceded by: George Clarke followed by: Robert Walpole
* As [Secretary of State for the Northern Department](/) 1710–1713 preceded by: Henry Boyle Followed by: William Bromley
* As [Secretary of State for the Southern Department](/) 1713–1714 preceded by: The Earl of Dartmouth followed by: James Stanhope


### Quotes


* "[History](/) is [philosophy](/) teaching by example."


### Related entries


* [John Churchill, Duke of Marlborough](/john-churchill-duke-of-marlborough)
* [Jonathan Swift](/jonathan-swift)
* TBA
