
# Text version of the Primer is never acceptable in and of itself

From the Quicksilver Metaweb.

[Between 1869 and 1930](/between-1869-and-1930), more than two hundred [writers](/writers) imitated, revised or parodied Lewis Carroll's [Alice in Wonderland](/alice-in-wonderland). Some sent Carroll's plucky protagonist into other [imaginary](/imaginary) lands; others sent different protagonists to encounter the [Mad Hatter](/mad-hatter), the [Cheshire Cat](/cheshire-cat), and the [Red Queen](/red-queen). Some promoted more [conservative agendas](/conservative-agendas), while others advocated [feminism](/feminism) or [socialism](/socialism). Among Carroll's imitators were significant [literary figures](/literary-figures) such as [Christina Rossetti](/christina-rossetti), [[Frances [Hodgson](/hodgson) Burnett]], and [E. Nes[bit](/bit)]. Literary critic Carolyn [Sigler](/sigler) argues that this [process of appropriation and rewriting](/process-of-appropriation-and-rewriting) built Alice's literary reputation. Today, after Shakespeare and the Bible, Lewis Carroll is the most oft cited writer in the English-speaking [world](/world).

While Carroll was [occasionally annoyed](/occasionally-annoyed) that others were profiting from his literary creations, he also saw such works as a form of tribute, a [marker](/marker) of his cultural [impact](/impact). After all, Carroll had taken many of his characters from Mother Goose Rhymes and had himself mimicked and [spoofed](/spoofed) various [primers](/primers) and manners [books](/books). Such parodic appropriations were [still commonplace](/still-commonplace), despite the fact that the Romantic ideal of the "expressive individual" was already [being codified into law](/being-codified-into-law). Carroll defined his creativity less through original invention than through his clever reworking of the shared cultural [reservoir](/reservoir). [Alice in Wonderland](/alice-in-wonderland) was part of an [ongoing dialog](/ongoing-dialog) and no one assumed that intellectual property law could be deployed to [silence](/silence) subsequent [writers](/writers).

Now try a [thought experiment](/thought-experiment). [Imagine](/imagine) that the Wonderland stories were [first](/first) appearing as the product of Disney, Viacom, or some other contemporary [media](/media) company. How long [would it be before](/would-it-be-before) Ms. Rossetti, Burnett, or Nesbit were [shut down](/shut-down) with cease and desist [letters](/letters)? [How many people](/how-many-people) would download "A New Alice in the [Old Wonderland](/old-wonderland)" before a studio [flack](/flack) asserted Disney's exclusive control over [Alice](/alice) TM ([EEDDDIDOTTIR](/eedddidottir)), [The Cheshire Cat](/the-cheshire-cat) TM ([EEDDDIDOTTIR](/eedddidottir)), or the [Mad Hatter](/mad-hatter) TM ([EEDDDITHORA](/eedddithora))?

I must confess. This is more than a hypothetical question. Rossetti's later day descendants are [still seeking](/still-seeking) inspiration from popular fiction (though now they are more apt to rewrite [television](/television) programs than books). In fact, in the digital age, such parodies reach a global readership unimagined by [the Victorians](/the-victorians). One fan website indexes original [stories](/stories) centering on more than 120 different television series, films, books, and [comic books](/comic-books), ranging from Jane Austin to [Dawson's Creek](/dawson-s-creek).

```
   

```
Like [Rossetti and company](/rossetti-and-company), these [contemporary parodists](/contemporary-parodists), now called "fans," borrow characters, situations, and [themes](/themes) from pre-existing works and use them as resources for their [own](/own) stories. [Sometimes](/sometimes), such stories offer [pointed ideological](/pointed-ideological) critiques of the original [works](/works). [Other times](/other-times), fans re-center the [plots around secondary](/plots-around-secondary) characters or simply [provide](/provide) back story. These modern-day "scribblers" are housewives, secretaries, librarians, students, average citizens who write as a [[labor of [love](/love)]], [paying](/paying) tribute to popular [[narratives that have [captured](/captured) their imagination]], sharing what they create with a "virtual" community of readers who share their [passions](/passions).

Feminist critic Nina Auerback suggests that [the nineteenth century women](/the-nineteenth-century-women)  who rewrote Alice and other literary works encouraged sought [to liberate](/to-liberate) their female [[characters from "the single set]] of circumstances in which author and [audience](/audience) imagined [them.]" The ability to contrast the "New Alice," as one author called her protagonist, with the old powerfully demonstrated feminist critiques of gender relations. A contemporary fan writer expresses a similar [impulse](/impulse): "What I love about fandom is the freedom we have allowed ourselves to create and recreate our characters over and over again. Fanfic rarely sits still. It's like a living, evolving thing, taking on its own life, one story building on another, [each writer's reality bouncing off](/each-writer-s-reality-bouncing-off) another's and maybe even melding together to form a whole [new creation](/new-creation)....I find that fandom can be [extremely creative because](/extremely-creative-because) we have the ability to keep changing our characters and giving them a [[new [life](/life) over and over]]. [We can kill](/we-can-kill) and resurrect them as often as we like. We can change their personalities and how [they react](/they-react) to situations.... We can give them [an infinite, always-changing life rather than the single life of their original creation](/an-infinite-always-changing-life-rather-than-the-single-life-of-their-original-creation)." Note, of course, that the [rights](/rights) she discusses are moral rights she and [other](/other) fan writers have "allowed" [themselves](/themselves), not legal rights granted by corporate property [holders](/holders).

```
    

```
Though [preserving](/preserving) a long-standing literary [practice](/practice), these fan writers are the [shock](/shock) troupes in one of [the central struggles that will define the future](/the-central-struggles-that-will-define-the-future) of digital media. On the [one hand](/one-hand), the past two decades have seen the introduction of a [broad range](/broad-range) of new media technologies (from the VCR and the photocopier to MP3) which empower consumers to archive, annotate, appropriate, and recirculate cultural materials. Such technologies have been introduced amid a pervasive rhetoric of democratic participation and interactive storytelling. On the other, the [past two](/past-two) decades have witnessed the emergence of economic and legal [structures designed to insure](/structures-designed-to-insure) tight control over intellectual property as the basis for the cross-media [[exploitation of "branded" [materials](/materials)]]. The [current](/current) buzz about media [convergence](/convergence) temporarily [masks](/masks) the tensions between these two [visions](/visions) for the future of American media, but these contradictions [will soon result in bloody struggles](/will-soon-result-in-bloody-struggles) over intellectual [property](/property). The other week, Fox's lawyers took down dozens of Buffy the Vampire Slayer fansites, and nobody even [BLINKed](/blink) because such [[saber-rattling has become [a regular occurrence](/a-regular-occurrence) in cyberspace]].

A year or so ago, J. Michael Straczinski, the executive producer of the [cult television series](/cult-television-series), Babylon 5, was speaking to the students in my [science fiction](/science-fiction) class at MIT. One student asked him what he thought about "fans," and after a pause, he replied, "You mean, copyright infringers." The [remark](/remark) was met with nervous laughter but it was clear that Strazinski and the student had radically [different world](/different-world) views.

```
    

```
So far, most discussions of intellectual property in cyberspace has sought to [calm fears of a loss of control](/calm-fears-of-a-loss-of-control) over [the flow](/the-flow) of ideas, images, and [information](/information). [Technologists](/technologists) have touted new [automated enforcement mechanisms](/automated-enforcement-mechanisms) that allow [owners](/owners) to ferret out infringements or digital watermarks that can determine [the precise origins](/the-precise-origins) of an appropriated image. Yet there has been [surprisingly little discussion](/surprisingly-little-discussion) over whether such tight regulation of intellectual property is, in fact, in [the public](/the-public) interest. Who speaks for the "scribblers" in these debates? [[Seemingly [no](/no) [one](/one)]].

Lawyers may disagree about whether fan stories fall under fair use, whether [they gain](/they-gain) any protection from recent Supreme Court decisions broadening the definition of parody to include various forms of [sampling](/sampling). [None of this matters!](/none-of-this-matters) Fans don't profit from their use of borrowed intellectual property; they clearly mark their sites as unofficial to avoid any risk of consumer [confusion](/confusion). [Who cares!](/who-cares) The fan sites can hardly be said to diminish public interest in [the series](/the-series) often actively organizing letter-writing campaigns to keep floundering programs on the networks. Big deal! Fan websites constitute forms of cultural criticism and political speech. So what!

[If you are](/if-you-are) a housewife in Nebraska and you receive a letter from Viacom's attorneys telling you to remove your website or they will take away your house and your kid's college fund, you [don't think twice](/don-t-think-twice). You [fold](/fold). Computer activists reassure us that [it is](/it-is) impossible to police [the](/the) web, that sites which are taken down will spring up tomorrow from [another location](/another-location), but when you're the one in the cross hairs, you [BLINK](/blink).

Not a [single](/single) case involving fan fiction has ever reached the courts. Not a single civil liberties organization has stepped forward to offer protection to fans who have [posted](/posted) their original fiction on the web. Presumably, the right to free expression doesn't extend to the right to participate in your culture. As currently understood, the First Amendment protects media producers, but not media consumers, even though digital media subtly erases the line between the two. Copyright and trademarks are legal "rights" granted to property owners, while "fair use" is a defense which can only be asserted and adjudicated [once you have been brought forward](/once-you-have-been-brought-forward) on infringement charges. And most of the people being caught in these battles simply [lack the financial resources](/lack-the-financial-resources) to take on a major corporation in court.

Disney, Fox, and Viacom certainly understand what's at stake [here](/here). The extraordinary number of media mergers over [the past](/the-past) decade attests to their recognition that media convergence will turn intellectual property into solid gold. Viacom speaks of a television series like Star Trek as a franchise, one that can generate a [[seemingly [[infinite [number](/number)]] of [derivative](/derivative) [products](/products)]] and create revenue [streams across many](/streams-across-many) different media [channels](/channels). What they can't produce and market directly, they will license to another company and reap [royalties](/royalties).

Preparing for this new era, media companies [aim](/aim) to [expand](/expand) their legal control over intellectual property as far and as wide as they [possibly can](/possibly-can), strip-mining our culture in the process. They have made inventive uses of trademark law to secure their [exclusive](/exclusive) rights to [everything](/everything) from Spock's pointy ears to "Beam Me Up, Scotty," from the transporter's hum to the Klingon [home planet](/home-planet). They have lobbied congress to [erode away](/erode-away) the remaining protections for fair use. They have expanded the [duration](/duration) of their copyright protection and thus prevented works from falling into the public [domain](/domain) until they have been drained of all possible value. [They are seeking](/they-are-seeking) to rewrite policies surrounding the issuing of desirable domain [names](/names) to block them from [falling into](/falling-into) the hands of the wrong sort. They have exerted legal claims that extend [far beyond](/far-beyond) any [rational interpretation](/rational-interpretation) of the [law](/law), counting on everyday citizens to fold before their mighty roar, and for the most part, [they do](/they-do). Fans are simply one group who are feeling the impact of this expansive new understanding of intellectual property rights; their impact on academic life would require another whole essay. In the end, we all will suffer a diminished right to quote, critique, and [reference core](/reference-core) cultural materials. Imagine what our [holiday season](/holiday-season) would look like if Thomas Nash had trademarked Santa Claus!

Our current [conception](/conception) of "intellectual property" represents a [local aberration](/local-aberration) in the history of [human](/human) creativity. The model of authorship that underlies modern intellectual property [law is an artifact of the Romantic](/law-is-an-artifact-of-the-roman) era and the notion of the inspired individual, standing apart from his culture, creating new works [sui generis](/sui-generis). What one originates, the law insists, one should have the right to control and profit from. We call it intellectual property, but that's something of a [distraction](/distraction). [Unlike real](/unlike-real) estate developers, authors don't have to [negotiate](/negotiate) with previous landowners for access to their [new territory](/new-territory). Never [mind that this represents a totally bogus theory](/mind-that-this-represents-a-totally-bogus-theory) of cultural creation or that [over time](/over-time), this ideal of the expressive individual has devolved, without much fanfare, into a corporate right to control media products. The legal [fiction is](/fiction-is) that [no one is harmed](/no-one-is-harmed) by their [land grab](/land-grab) on the cultural commons.

Contrary to [the usual way we discuss](/the-usual-way-we-discuss) this issue, it isn't ultimately a question of author's rights. Many authors and artists would prefer to see their works reintegrated into the culture and to be able to draw openly on their tradition. But, corporate attorneys want to protect their trademarks from being [diluted](/diluted). [Everyone](/everyone) remembers what happen to Scotch Tape when they allowed their brand name to be used generically. So, Coca-Cola sends [out spies](/out-spies) to make sure nobody gets served a Pepsi when they order a Coke, Xerox insists that we call a photocopy a photocopy, and [Fox scans the web](/fox-scans-the-web) to make sure nobody puts a X-Files logo on an unauthorized [homepage](/homepage). They know that in attacking the consumers of their products, they are damaging [relationships that will be vital to the future](/relationships-that-will-be-vital-to-the-future) of their cultural franchises, but [they see little](/they-see-little) choice as long as turning [a blind eye](/a-blind-eye) to "infringement" could pave the way for corporate competitors to exploit their valuable properties. In [the long haul](/the-long-haul), such policies will result in cultural stagnation, as images and stories lose their [ability to accrue](/ability-to-accrue) deeper cultural [significance over time](/significance-over-time).

For most of human [history](/history), the storyteller, the bard, the griot, was thought to be the inheritor and protector of a shared cultural tradition. Homer took plots, characters, stories, well known to his audiences and retold them in [particular vivid](/particular-vivid) terms; [the basic building blocks](/the-basic-building-blocks) of his craft (phrases, epithets, metaphors), were passed from one generation to another. Homer and Aesop were probably composite figures, archetypes for this process of shared authorship and collaborative storytelling, the names modern [readers attach to the reservoir](/readers-attach-to-the-reservoir) of cultural materials that constituted the ancient world. The great works of the western tradition were polished like stones in a brook as they were handed [off from](/off-from) bard to bard. This process of [circulation](/circulation) and retelling intensified their fit with the culture, making them absolutely central to [the way](/the-way) a [people](/people) thought of [themselves](/themselves). A mythic [figure like](/figure-like) King Arthur, for example, first surfaces as a [passing reference in](/passing-reference-in) some of the chronicles of the early Kings of England and over several centuries of [elaboration forms](/elaboration-forms) the basis for magnificent works like Morte D'Arthur or later, for [A Connecticut Yankee in King Arthur's Court](/a-connecticut-yankee-in-king-arthur-s-court).

Contemporary web culture would seem, in [many ways](/many-ways), to be a continuation of these folk practices. The difference is that our core myths and stories now belong to corporations, rather than the folk.

From the start, computers were seen as tools of collaboration, designed to facilitate brainstorming and [data-sharing](/data-sharing). [If one follows](/if-one-follows) the flow of ideas on a net discussion list for more than a few posts, it becomes harder and [harder to separate one person](/harder-to-separate-one-person)'s intellectual property from another's. We quote freely, incorporating part of the original message into our own, for the purposes of conversation, commentary and critique or simply so [we can make](/we-can-make) snitty little comments about another poster's [spelling errors](/spelling-errors). When netizens discuss television, we quote equally freely, pulling whole lines and speeches from the aired [material](/material) into our posts, and adding our own speculations about what it all means or what's going to happen next. Other people respond, add more material, and pretty soon [the series](/the-series) as viewed by [[members of the [list](/list)]] differs radically from the series as understood by its producers. The net is the traditional folk process working at [lighting fast speed](/lighting-fast-speed) on a global scale. If [real world](/real-world) events once turned into legends over decades, this same mythologizing process now takes place in an [afternoon](/afternoon).

One of my favorite websites allows parents to scan their children's art works into the computer and post them on a digital refrigerator [door](/door). Maybe, that's the best [metaphor](/metaphor) for the web -- a digital refrigerator door for amateur artists to share what they've made. Many have celebrated the grassroots creativity unleashed by the digital [revolution](/revolution). Indeed, there are new tools -- Photoshop, digital sampling, and so [forth](/forth) -- which are enabling new forms of folk culture to emerge. Yet, the web's real contribution has been to create [a channel](/a-channel) of distribution for forms of cultural production that would [otherwise lie](/otherwise-lie) unread in our desk drawer. Student filmmakers have always made home movies, but now we have d.cinema or i.film festivals that allow such works to be seen by the multitudes and since the success of [[The [Blair](/blair) Witch [Project](/project)]], some gifted amateurs are [fielding](/fielding) offers from major studios.

Enthusiasts are looking at all of this creativity and claiming that the web has significantly [lowered the barriers of entry](/lowered-the-barriers-of-entry) to the cultural marketplace, bringing us much closer to the free marketplace of ideas that our founding fathers envisioned. [The webmasters](/the-webmasters) are the modern pamphleteers, we are told, forging a revolution in thought and expression. If [such a world really exists](/such-a-world-really-exists), [sign me](/sign-me) on. However, such utopian proclamations are being made [too hastily](/too-hastily) -- as [long](/long) as the trend is towards tightening corporate control over intellectual property rather than a [recognition](/recognition) that the right to free expression must include a recognition of our collective right to [participate within and make use of the core](/participate-within-and-make-use-of-the-core) materials of our culture. After all, many of the original pamphleteers [masked their identities behind names drawn from Greek](/masked-their-identities-behind-names-drawn-from-greek) mythology; the Federalist Papers were published under a user name, and in today's intellectual marketplace, Hamilton, Madison, and Jay would be classified as "infringers."

Copyright law was originally understood as a balance between [the need to provide](/the-need-to-provide) incentives to authors and the need to [insure the speedy](/insure-the-speedy) circulation and cultural absorption of new ideas and [insights](/insights). The new corporate culture has fundamentally shifted that balance, placing all the muscle on [[one side of [the equation](/the-equation)]]. The emerging practices of the web call into question the viability of our current legal fictions about culture originating through the autonomous actions of expressive individuals. We need to be thinking now about how to [create new mechanisms which defend the idea](/create-new-mechanisms-which-defend-the-idea) of the cultural commons against persistent trends towards privatization and protectionism.

[One can](/one-can), of course, imagine that all of these new web "scribblers" will create original works that have no relationship to previously circulating materials and in the process, a more participatory culture would displace [broadcast media](/broadcast-media) altogether, but that would contradict everything literary history [might teach us](/might-teach-us) about how human creativity operates. Authors have elaborated upon what has come before. In this new cultural economy, the most [powerful materials](/powerful-materials) will be those that [command recognition](/command-recognition) around the globe and for the foreseeable future, those materials will originate [within the mass](/within-the-mass) media.

Media companies certainly have the right to profit from the investments they have made in our culture, but [perhaps, they need to develop new models of how](/perhaps-they-need-to-develop-new-models-of-how) rents can be extracted from intellectual properties. The on-line book dealer, Amazon, for example, has helped to foster amateur discussions of books, creating an associates program which enabled web critics to get profit points from [linking back](/linking-back) to their corporate homepage. Amazon has discovered that building the basis for a new book culture helps, in the long [run](/run), to increase public [awareness](/awareness) of and demand for books. Perhaps, media producers [need to follow](/need-to-follow) Amazon's example and find ways to [transform media](/transform-media) consumers from "copyright infringers" into niche marketers, active collaborators [in the](/in-the) production of value from cultural materials, worthy "associates" helping to [define the place](/define-the-place) of popular culture in an age of media convergence.

For the past century, mass media has displaced traditional folk practices, has appropriated figures from folklore and displaced them with trademarked characters. Today, when we envision [the Mad Hatter](/the-mad-hatter), we think not of a literary figure in the public domain but a cartoon character which Disney [still](/still) licenses. Mass media has brought its stories into our homes and into our hearts. Contemporary mass media provides [the central frame](/the-central-frame) of cultural reference for our conversations and our fantasies. When we tell our own stories, they often involve [encounters with media](/encounters-with-media) celebrities. When we recount our fantasies, they often involve fictional characters from our favorite films or television shows. When we [start to speak](/start-to-speak) with our friends, [[[catch](/catch) phrases]] from contemporary sitcoms and commercials roll off our tongues, much as Shakespeare and the Bible [fell easily to the lips of an earlier generation](/fell-easily-to-the-lips-of-an-earlier-generation). Let's face [it](/it) -- media culture is our culture, and if we are going to use the resources of the web to tell stories that reflect our cultural experiences, we should anticipate that many of them will borrow heavily from the materials they have so aggressively marketed to us. As Jean Jambon, one of Carroll's 19th century imitators, explained, "It may be thought that in introducing a certain [little lady](/little-lady) ALICEnce has been taken. But [royal personages are public](/royal-personages-are-public) property."
